---
layout: gaia
title: "User Control: How is Gaia Decentralized?"
subtitle: Cras at dolor eget urna varius faucibus tempus in elit. Cras a dui imperdiet, tempus metus quis, pharetra turpis.
tags: othertag
author:
---

Gaia's approach to decentralization focuses on user-control of data and storage. If a user
can choose which gaia hub and which backend provider to store data with, then that is all
the decentralization required to enable user-controlled applications.

In Gaia, the control of user data lies in the way that user data is accessed. When an application
fetches a file `data.txt` for a given user `alice.id`, the lookup will follow these steps:

1. Fetch the zonefile for `alice.id`, and read her profile URL from that zonefile
2. Fetch the Alice's profile and _verify_ that it is signed by `alice.id`'s key
3. Read the application root URL (e.g. `https://gaia.alice.org/`) out of the profile
4. Fetch file from `https://gaia.alice.org/data.txt`

Because `alice.id` controls her zonefile, she can change where her profile is stored,
if the current storage of the profile is compromised. Similarly, if Alice wishes to change
her gaia provider, or run her own gaia node, she can change the entry in her profile.

For applications writing directly on behalf of Alice, they do not need to perform this
lookup. Instead, the blockstack [authentication flow](https://github.com/blockstack/blockstack.js/blob/master/src/auth/README.md#authentication-response-payload-schema) provides Alice's chosen application root
URL to the application. This authentication flow _is also_ within Alice's control, because the
authentication response _must_ be generated by Alice's browser.

While it is true that many Gaia hubs will use backend providers like AWS or Azure, allowing
users to easily operate their own hubs, which may select different backend providers (and we'd
like to implement more backend drivers), enables truly user-controlled data, while enabling
high performance and high availability for data reads and writes.
